WHAT IS CITREA?

Citrea is the first rollup that enhances the capabilities of Bitcoin blockspace with zero-knowledge technology, making it possible to build everything on Bitcoin.

Citrea keeps the demand for Bitcoin within its network and ensures that Bitcoin Network serves as data availability and settlement layer for Citrea transactions. Citrea requires no consensus changes to Bitcoin.

Citrea key USPs:

Citrea is a Type 2 zkEVM
Citrea processes a large number of zkEVM transaction batches and submits a succinct zero-knowledge proof that allows easy verification of the batch validity in an inscription-like envelope to Bitcoin. The zero-knowledge proofs generated by the prover outputs the state difference that batch resulted in, with these proofs then being published to Bitcoin regularly.

Citrea proofs are inscribed in Bitcoin and optimistically verified via BitVM
Anyone running a Bitcoin node can both verify Citrea and access its full state. This method ensures that the data needed to transact on Citrea or verify Citrea becomes permissionlessly available for every single node in the Bitcoin network. The proof inscribed in Bitcoin by prover(s) is optimistically verified in Bitcoin as well, thanks to BitVM.

Citrea supports Light Nodes
Taking advantage of a recursive zero-knowledge proof system - STARKs specifically - Citrea allows easy verification of the blockchain by light nodes. By recursively verifying batch proofs within light client proofs, the full Citrea dataset shrinks into a small zero-knowledge proof and lives inside Bitcoin. Anyone running a Bitcoin Light Node (SPV) can trustlessly verify Citrea and access to its state root.

Citrea has the first universal trust-minimized two-way peg
Citrea light client proofs are natively verified on Bitcoin via BitVM, enabling the first layer 2 verification in Bitcoin and trust-minimized two-way peg mechanism. Pegged BTC is held in the BitVM contract (leveraging Taproot) on Bitcoin network. Withdrawals are only authorized with valid ZK proofs, meaning no party can steal the pegged BTC from the bridge.

Citrea uses $BTC as its native token. To avoid confusion and improve on/off-ramp UX; Citrea native $BTC is referred to as $cBTC in Citrea.


Overview:

Bitcoin is designed to facilitate trustless payments in a decentralized network of participants. Over the years, Bitcoin blockspace has become more and more valuable because of its high success in achieving decentralization and security. Citrea uses Bitcoin blockspace to secure its execution, introducing a novel way to use it efficiently via zero-knowledge proof technology.

Citrea uses a small subset of Bitcoin blockspace and divides the same blockspace among magnitude of transactions than can be done on the layer 1 itself. By rolling up a batch of transactions together and computing the result using the most advanced verifiable computing technique - zero-knowledge proofs - Citrea provides Bitcoin-equivalent security to a vast array of applications; including but not limited to more complex financial primitives.

Citrea inherits full Bitcoin L1 security, including all four properties needed for its security:

Validity: Each Citrea batch is processed inside the zero-knowledge VM, resulting in a succinct zero-knowledge proof that validates all the inputs, computation, and outputs. The proof is inscribed into Bitcoin, making it available for every single participant in the network, including light nodes (SPVs) and Bitcoin script itself, through BitVM.

Data Availability: Each Citrea proof outputs the state difference of the batch. The proofs with outputs are inscribed in Bitcoin. By scanning over proofs in Bitcoin blocks, anyone can build the latest state tree of the rollup, ensuring the relevant data to transact is always available on Bitcoin.

Censorship Resistance: Citrea utilizes inscription-like forced transaction envelopes on the Bitcoin main chain. Anyone can submit a Citrea transaction to Bitcoin within a specified encoding. Citrea's circuit ensures that every single forced transaction is included in the next batch via inclusion and soundness proofs over the corresponding Bitcoin block they are included within.

Re-org Resistance: Citrea includes the most recent finalized Bitcoin block hash into the rollup block header. After the corresponding proof for the rollup block is sent to Bitcoin and finalized, it cannot be re-orged without re-orging the Bitcoin blockchain itself, something that is almost impossible after 6 blocks of confirmation.
